Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
This November the 23rd, Eddie Thompson of College Station will turn 98 years old.
His life that started in 1907 has spanned nearly a decade of history, including both World War I and World War II.
At 35, he was older than most volunteers when he joined the Navy in 1942.
Join the Navy and see the world, he figured, and he was right.
At least most of the Pacific Theater
from the deck of the proud cruiser USS Birmingham, CL-62.
By the time Eddie Thompson got his orders, the Birmingham had already fought battles as part of the Atlantic fleet, giving gunfire support in the invasion of Sicily in the summer of 43.
But then it was sent to the Pacific, arriving in Pearl Harbor in September of that year, and then off to do battle in Saipan, in Guam, the Leyte Gulf, just to name a few.
When Eddie Thompson boarded in January of 1945, there were still battles to fight at Iwo Jima and Okinawa.
On May 4th, 1945, after fighting off three attacks, the Birmingham was damaged a third time when a Japanese suicide plane hit her forward.
Eddie Thompson was in the cabin right next to where the plane hit.
And now 60 years later, we're glad he's here to tell the story of his service.
Mr. Thompson, it is really an honor to have you here visiting with us.
Well, thank you.
It's an honor to be here.
Before we start talking about your service with the U.S.
Navy, I want to talk about the Baker Hotel in downtown Dallas.
That was a large part of your life before you joined the service.
Twelve years.
What did you do there?
Well, it started out as a bellhop.
The bellman, you know, they help people carry luggage and show them to the rooms and do whatever they can for them.
And then I got to be bell captain, and then I got to be night manager of the hotel.
Came on at 11 o'clock at night and got off at 7 the next morning.
And I didn't like the night work, but I had to do it anyway.
Back then?
Huh?
Back then, Dallas was a lot different town than it is now.
Oh, yeah.
Everything was right downtown then.
Yeah, those suburbs weren't out there.
You had the Baker Hotel, and right across the street was the Adolphus Hotel.
That's right, yeah.
The Baker's not there anymore.
Right.
I don't think either is the Adolphus either.
Everything's changed.
I don't know about the Adolphus.
But they blew the Baker down and put a telephone bell in up there.
I guess as a bellhop, you probably toted luggage for a lot of famous people.
Yes, I sure did.
I can't think of all of them right now, but I did a lot of them.
Probably saw a lot of governors and political people and everything.
A lot of comedians and all that.
Bob Hope even.
He was down there.
You carried his luggage for him, huh?
Yeah.
Then in 1942, you were relatively old when you volunteered, enlisted in the Navy.
That's right.
Why did you go Navy?
Well, I didn't want to be drafted and put in the Army.
I just wanted to be in the Navy.
instead of the Army, so I made a choice.
Like I say, the government declared the hotel industry essential to the war effort, and key personnel would not be drafted indefinitely.
They just probably would never be drafted, and I was key personnel.
I was the night manager.
of the Baker Hotel.
And so I stayed there.
See, they put me in a Navy office just as soon as I enlisted and was sworn in.
They put me in an office, and I worked in that office two years.
Finally, I went out to Shoemaker, California, at the receiving station, and I was assigned to the Birmingham.
And I was on it.
Almost a year.
Now, the office you were in was the Office of Naval Procurement, is that right?
Office of Naval Officer Procurement, right.
What did you learn there?
Well, I just learned how to handle people, you know, trying to talk.
I had to get them to fill out papers, one thing or another, and that's what I did, you know.
I had forms of all kinds to fill out, and I had to see that they did it right.
And I learned in some crazy ones and then some good ones.
They figured that you were a people person working at the Baker Hotel, and that was a good job for you.
Yeah.
Well, I learned a little how to handle people.
That's what they seemed to think.
And when they found out I worked at the Baker Hotel, they immediately assigned me to this Office of Naval Officer Procurement.
And that's what I was in.
until January of 45, they closed office.
And I went to this receiving station and drew the Birmingham.
That's how come me on it.
When you went to the Birmingham, did you know then that the Birmingham was a pretty active cruiser in the war already?
No, no, I didn't.
I didn't know it.
No, I found out later.
I found out about a lot of history of it.
Right.
You were on a pretty active ship.
What was your job on the Birmingham?
Well, we were in the computer room, they called it.
We had instruments that aimed the guns.
And the guns were in a mount up on the decks, you know.
And they can't fire, can't do anything unless an officer tells them to.
And we were in the room, five decks down in that ship.
We were connected with phones to the Tuarts, and we told them what to do.
They couldn't do anything unless we told them to.
And that was part of it.
I had a telephone.
I was talking to somebody in the Tuarts or somewhere all the time.
I was connected with them, you see.
So you pretty much told them where to shoot the guns and when to shoot them, right?
We told them, yeah.
We had to tell them when to shoot the guns and where to shoot them.
They couldn't fire unless somebody told them to.
Let's talk about the islands that you were either on or you floated real near.
You told me a list of some of the islands in the Pacific that you had experience with.
What were some of the islands?
Well, Guam was one.
Like I told you, my brother was on a sign there.
He was stationed on Guam.
And my ship came in there.
to get a hull patch so we could get to Pearl Harbor.
And while they were doing that, I got permission to go over on this island and visit him, which is the island of Guam.
And so he was a chief petty officer, and he was a cook, chief commissary, Stuart, they called it.
Right.
And he was stationed there, so I got to visit him.
And then I was assigned.
When the war was over, well, I was still on the ship, and they said that all the people that were eligible to go home could go home now or stay with the ship, whatever you want to do.
So 27 of us wanted to leave the ship, and we got a 30-man tent, pitched on the side of a hill.
on Okinawa and lived there 10 days waiting for a troop ship to bring me back to the States.
And finally I got back to San Francisco.
So you lived 10 days on the side of a hill?
That's right.
On Okinawa.
What was the weather like?
Rainy.
Rainy and mosquitoes.
That was two of the worst things.
Boy, those mosquitoes nearly drug us off.
Some of the other islands that you remember, you listed a bunch of the islands in the Pacific.
Well, I didn't visit any of them.
I was just close to them, you know.
Right.
We were, what is it, Kwajalein, Santa Fe, and Indy, we talked, Saipan, Tanyan, Guam, Ulite, Iwo Jima, Karamaroto, Iashima, and Okinawa.
Now, you saw some action.
There were some battles that you all fought, particularly in Iwo Jima and Okinawa.
That's right.
Some smaller battles in other places.
But what do you remember about the battles at Iwo Jima and Okinawa?
Well, I remember that we were just tense all the time because those Japs' suicide planes had instructions to dive into the biggest ship they could find.
We were just leery all the time that they were going to dive into us and scared of it, you know.
So we had to live with it.
And finally one did.
Like I told you, it killed 51 men and wounded 80 men.
That's one suicide plane.
And we're going to talk more about that later.
That happened on May the 4th in 1945 about the kamikaze plane that...
killed a lot of your shipmates.
But what I'd like to do now is we're going to show the audience some photographs, and I'll talk about them, and I'll tell you what's up on the screen now as we take a look.
First off, this is the USS Birmingham.
That is a picture of the proud ship, CL-62, which served so proudly in the war.
And from what I understand, looking in the Internet, I believe that it is docked now in San Francisco.
from what I understand, I guess, and people can visit it.
But that's quite a ship.
And I know that you told me, Mr. Thompson, that it had 40 gun barrels.
Is that right?
It was a large ship.
Different size, 20 millimeters and 40 millimeters and, you know, 5-inch guns and 6-inch guns.
It was four different kind of guns on that ship.
And you probably knew every one of them since you were in the computer room telling them how to shoot them.
That's right.
See, they can't open a fire unless they're told what to do.
If they're going to fire that gun, they're going to have to be told by an officer.
Got another photograph that I want the audience to see now.
This is a photograph that was taken on the USS Birmingham.
As a matter of fact, this picture actually hangs
in your apartment here in College Station, and we borrowed it for this.
And if I was told correctly, I believe, pardon my pen here, that this is Seaman First Class Thompson right there with his crew on the USS Birmingham.
You know the picture that we're talking about that we're showing the audience, Mr. Thompson.
It's the one that hangs on your wall.
Talk a little bit about that picture.
Do you remember when it was taken?
Yes, I do.
I sure do.
But I didn't know that I'd ever get one.
Luckily, I got one.
How many were on the Birmingham?
I think you said... 1,300 men.
It was a wartime crew.
1,300.
Yeah.
Okay, let's go to May the 4th, 1945.
A suicide Japanese plane attacks the USS Birmingham.
What do you remember about that day and what happened?
Well, I remember I was just scared to death nearly.
I didn't know what was going on.
We heard the alarms and things on the ship that was danger out there.
And we just were walking around in the daze because we didn't know what to do.
And all at once this ship next door to me, I mean, this plane hit carrying a 500-pound bomb.
And it dove in, even the medical department, the hospital part was hit and killed some men that was in there as patients.
So it's just unbelievable how things happened out there.
Did you stay in your cabin or what was your first reaction?
I stayed in my apartment until we found out what was going on.
Because we didn't know anything about what happened.
We had to wait and find out.
And 51 of your shipmates were killed?
51, yeah.
And several more were injured.
Oh, 80 of them were wounded.
This wasn't the first time that the Birmingham had been hit.
I believe it was the third time it had been hit by a suicide plane.
Yeah, that's the only time it was hit while I was on it.
Right.
I wasn't on it the other time.
See, you know the story, you've heard it about the Princeton.
Yes, sir.
It killed 200 men.
The Princeton was a carrier, aircraft carrier, and it had caught fire.
And the weeple pulled alongside to squirt water on it, and it was pretty close.
And about nearly all the guys that wasn't
doing something else, they were out there just watching stuff, you know, observers.
And it killed 50, it killed 200 of them.
They were spectators, all it was to it, mostly.
And it killed 200 of them and wounded about 300.
So it sure was a terrible thing that Princeton was.
Of course, they all are.
Indeed.
But that's one of the worst things I ever heard of.
That's right.
Matter of fact, I was visiting with Mr. Thompson the other day, and I told him kind of an ironic story myself.
My mother's first husband was a World War II Navy pilot.
His name was Lieutenant Bob Butler, and his unit, VF-27, was a unit that flew F6F Hellcats.
And VF-27 was actually the Hellcat unit that was on the Princeton at that time.
My mother's husband at the time wasn't there.
He had actually been killed about two months before in a training exercise.
But it was his mates that were actually on the Princeton at the time when it came in contact with the Birmingham.
That, I believe, was in October of 1944, actually, before you boarded the USS Birmingham.
That's right, yeah.
And you talked a little bit about your brother, about meeting up with him in Guam.
That's something that every Navy person doesn't get to do, is meet up with a relative during wartime.
That's right.
I got to visit him one time.
It's on, and I was just lucky enough to do it.
We got hit at Okinawa.
We worked about two days out of Okinawa, I mean out of Guam, and they had a floating dry dock down there.
Yes, sir.
And this ship needed hull patched.
So we received orders to go down to Guam and get this hull patched so we could get to Pearl Harbor.
So that's what we did.
And my brother was there.
We were there a couple of days, and I got to visit him twice.
We've got another photograph I want the audience to see.
Speaking of your brother, Pete, we've got a picture here.
And...
I'm going to adjust it here a little bit so we can see a little bit better.
There we go.
This is Seaman First Class Eddie Thompson right here.
And this is his brother Pete right over here.
And this is his wife.
And this is Eddie's wife, Betty.
And this is Pete's son.
And in this photograph, I know, Mr. Thompson, you can't see it.
Your niece, Sharon Colson, gave it to us.
Pete is pointing out on a globe, I guess, where you and he had been to one of your nephews in this photograph.
So that's a wonderful family picture that your niece Sharon Coulson shared with us.
Well, that's good.
I didn't know it.
Yep, yep, yep.
Let's talk a little bit more about the Birmingham and just the pure size of this ship.
You say that it had 40 guns on it.
And 1,300 people.
I guess during the course of a war, I guess you don't get to meet all of them, even though you're on the same craft.
That's right.
Oh, man.
You couldn't meet all that 1,300 crew members, you know.
And a lot of times we had passengers that were going out to board their ship.
They were taking us.
We went the closest to him, where his ship was, and he'd go with us on the Birmingham.
And when we got close to where his ship was, they'd let him off, and he'd go back to his ship.
Right, right.
You fought, besides Okinawa and Iwo Jima, there were other island battles that you fought from offshore.
Yeah, just aircraft.
You know, that's what we were fighting, and we did some shore bombardment.
We had a man, a spotter, they called it, on the beach, and he'd tell us where to shoot, and we did that.
They called it a call fire.
When they called for fire in a certain area, well, we did it.
You were 10 months on the Birmingham.
During that amount of time, I can imagine you saw all kinds of weather.
As a matter of fact, you told me that you endured a typhoon or two.
I was in a typhoon one time, and that ship, it was really high wind.
I don't know what the speed of the wind was, but the ship would just go like that.
And I'd say, it's coming back up.
It's not coming back up, but the bow would go down.
And I said, it's not coming back up this time.
But it did.
Did you get seasick?
No.
Luckily, I wasn't the type.
Some people are and some not.
I don't know what it is.
It's nature.
But luckily, I was not the type that got seasick.
And a lot of them did.
They got sick.
They didn't care what happened.
They just felt so awful, you know.
We told some Japs was coming up close.
I don't care.
I don't care what to do.
I know that the Birmingham, after it was attacked the third time with the suicide pilot, it was in desperate need of repair.
And I believe it went to Guam first to get its hull repaired and then on to Pearl Harbor where it was there for three months.
Yeah, we were there three months getting it fixed.
Right.
What did you do during that time?
Well, we went to recreation places, one thing or another, just to get out of the way, you know.
And they had places where you'd go and kind of be on vacation.
And not on the ship or anything, but on the island.
And that's where we went.
We'd go to several different ones, you know.
So you'd have a place to be and a place to wait for the ship.
They didn't need all those guys on that ship.
when we ended up in Pearl Harbor.
Right, right.
You told me though that it was during this time that the Birmingham got new orders when it was repaired, new orders to go back to Japan and fight a possible ground war.
Talk about that.
Well, they had already selected us when we got fixed up at Pearl Harbor to go to the Philippines
have a big fleet rendezvous.
They're going to invade the mainland of Japan, November the 1st, 1945.
And we were part of it.
And we had already been assigned.
And luckily, Harry Truman ordered the atomic bomb dropped, and they convinced the Jeps that they better quit, and they surrendered.
And then that canceled that invasion of Japan.
And so, like I say, then they told us we were eligible to go home.
Well, you could go home, and that's what I did.
When I got the information about being eligible, I qualified, and I got permission to leave the ship, go over on Okinawa.
It's like I told you, stay 10 days, and then we caught a troop ship.
and we were a week getting home.
So, it called a troop train from California to Norman, Oklahoma.
That's where I was discharged.
Right, right.
Norman, Oklahoma.
You were raised on a farm in Oklahoma.
That's right.
I had about 18 years on a farm before I got to Dallas.
I lived in Dallas over 70 years.
What did you do after you got out of the Navy?
I learned a new business.
I became an optician.
That's in a workshop where they make the glasses, you see.
Make the eyeglasses.
I learned how to do that.
And they called it optician.
Was that in Dallas?
Yeah, in Dallas, uh-huh.
So you went back to Dallas?
Yeah, I came back to Dallas, yeah.
Right.
When I got out of the Navy.
Yeah.
So I lived in Dallas, like I say, over 70 years.
And now you're here in College Station.
One thing we sort of referred to but didn't mention is that Eddie Thompson's niece is Sharon Colson, of course, the host of the show here on KAMU, and that's how I came to meet Eddie Thompson.
Eddie, in the few minutes that we have left, I know that your wife, Betty, of 60 years, you were very, very close to her.
She meant everything to you.
You lost her in 1996.
Talk about Betty Thompson.
Talk about her?
Yes, sir.
Oh, she was a fine young lady.
And she was 10 years younger than me.
And the people asked me why I married one so much younger.
And I said, well, she can take care of me longer.
But it didn't work the other way.
I took care of her.
She got what they call pulmonary fibrosis, which attacks your lungs.
And it took 10 years.
before it caused her death.
The doctors treated it in and out of hospitals, just all over the place, year after year.
They're trying to learn how to cure this stuff.
But they couldn't do it.
It just kept getting worse.
Fulmonary fibrosis, I don't know just what that is, except they told me that it attacks the lungs some way or another.
you had 60 wonderful years together and i know that she was a very talented lady you showed me in your apartment the other day some of the the rug work that she had done that's right she liked making stuff you know by hand like rugs and one thing another and uh she did a whole lot of that she just did an awful lot of it well mr thompson we've just got uh about a minute or so left and uh
I want to thank you very much for your service.
What does it mean to you being a veteran of World War II?
Well, I'm proud of it.
I'm proud that I would say that I was a veteran of World War II.
And they say that the World War II families, well, the generation of World War II generation did the greatest thing they've ever done for this country.
They won World War II.
And that's the greatest thing they've ever said that ever happened to this country was that the World War II victory went to us.
And I actually think it's right, too.
Well, indeed, you were part of the greatest generation, and I can't tell you what an honor it is to have you here on the show, and thank you very much.
Well, I sure hope that I'm not boring you too much.
Not at all, Mr. Thompson.
Thank you.
The USS Birmingham received nine battle stars for her World War II service and was retired to port in San Francisco in 1947.
How fortunate we are to have heroes among us like Eddie Thompson, who can still recall with clarity and with pride those precious days of his youth that he gave in defense of our freedom.
We salute Eddie Thompson for his service.
Please, won't you thank a veteran today?
Thanks for joining us.
For Eddie Thompson, I'm Tom Turbiville.
Tune in next time for Veterans of the Valley.